<center>
# Notes on Git {-}
</center>

.#d

Git is a **Distributed** Version Control System.  Most VCSs you know (like
CVS, Subversion, Clearcase, Perforce, and VSS) are centralised.  A Distributed
VCS allows you to make frequent, local, commits to checkpoint your work while
you're still perfecting the code -- you cannot do this with a centralised VCS.

These are my notes about git.  I started writing them for my own
understanding, almost like cheat sheets, but they may be useful for others
also.

.#d

<font color="red" size=+1>

>   <hr>
>   **Looking for gitolite documentation?  Click [here](gitolite/index.html)**.
>   <hr>

</font>

.#t

.#d

**Why git?**
:   Why is git so popular?  If you're just curious, but not curious enough to
    dig in like a developer, maybe [this article](git-lfy.html), which I wrote
    in 2008, will help.

**What is git?**
:   If you want to understand git, we have .@red<**slideshows**>@.
:   *   an [introduction](vc.html) to version control and the central concepts
        behind git -- for those who have never used *any* version control
        tool.
    *   what makes [git](git.html) so powerful -- for those who know something
        about version control but not git.

**git usage**
:   In the ["git usage"](usage.html) page you will find various tips and
    traps, information for command line and GUI users, Windows users, running
    a git server, plus a quick set of hints for people familiar with
    traditional VCSs like SVN and CVS.

.#d

**popular links**
:   These links show up a dozen or more times a day on #git (the git channel
    on IRC)
:   *   git as a [deployment](deploy.html) tool
    *   [Git concepts simplified](gcs.html) has lots of diagrams explaining git
    *   [Try it and see!](tias.html) -- shows how easy it is to safely try out
        almost any git feature on your own userid

**Other write-ups**
:   A whole bunch of [other articles](articles.html) on git

**Refreshers**
:   Git and DVCS [terminology](terminology.html)
:   

.#t

----

.@gray<There are also some [older articles and write-ups](archived/index.html)
that may still be relevant and useful, but I have not revisited them for a
while now.  Caveat reader!>@

----

## Basics

<font color="red">If you...

  * if you're itching to get started, but have become overwhelmed by having to
    understand git itself and how it fits with ssh or http etc., read
    [this](tias.html).

----

## License

(c) Copyright Sitaram Chamarty, sitaramc@gmail.com.  This documentation is
provided under a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
