# the missing gitk documentation

`gitk` is a very powerful GUI tool.  It's one of those rare beasts where the
pretty stuff is not just a crutch for the command-line-ignorant -- it actually
does really useful things that just cannot be done in a CLI.

Sadly, it is woefully undocumented.  Scratch that, it's almost *completely*
undocumented.

This is my attempt to do something about that.  Strictly speaking, you can
explore the UI and find all these features yourself, and indeed, if you find
any that are not listed here, please [email me](mailto:sitaramc@gmail.com).

## colors and bold

  * local branch names are in a green background.
  * remote branch names are in a mixed orange/green background.  ([**DO NOT
    checkout remote branches**](concepts/detached-head.html)!)
  * the currently checked out branch name is in bold.
  * tags are on a yellow background.

## repository operations

All these are from the commit list (the top pane):

  * right clicking on a commit message
    * create a tag
    * create a new branch
    * reset the current branch to this commit (soft/mixed/hard)
    * cherry-pick this current onto the current branch

  * right clicking on a branch name
    * checkout the branch (please heed the warning above and [**DO NOT
      checkout remote branches**](concepts/detached-head.html)!)
    * remove the branch

## the main menu

  * reload: if you're doing stuff on the command line in another screen, and
    want those changes reflected in gitk, hit `F5`.

    `F5` updates the refs and shows you their new values *while still showing
    you the old ones*.  It is most useful after operations like rebase,
    because you can compare the previous branch head with the new one.

    (`Ctrl-F5`, on the other hand, is a total refresh, throwing away
    everything that was previously shown.)

  * list/choose references: to quickly go to a particular reference, hit `F2`.
    If there are too many, you can specify a glob pattern in the box at the
    bottom to subset the list.  Clicking on a reference takes the main window
    to that reference.  The list window will stay open so you can click on
    other refs.

## browsing the commit list (top pane)

Many of these functions also have character key bindings.  For example "n"
acts the same as a "down arrow".  I'm not listing those; if you need them,
look in the source code for a series of `bindkey` statements and match them up
with the others.  It's not hard, and you don't need to know Tcl.  (I don't).

  * up/down arrow keys, pageup/down: obvious
  * left/right arrow keys: previous/next commit in browse history (think web
    browser's back/forward)
  * shift-up/down: find previous/next match (see [searching for commits](#sfc)
    below)

## browsing the diff

At any time, the bottom left pane shows a "diff", usually of the current
commit shown in the top pane.  The bottom right pane (by default) shows a list
of files in this "diff".

<a name="bcpc">

  * spacebar: move forward 1 page in the diff view
  * backspace/delete: ditto, but backward
  * "f": move to next file in the diff.  Both the bottom left and right panes
    will show a change when you do this.
  * "b": ditto, but previous file
  * click a file in the bottom right pane: scrolls the left pane to show that
    file's changes

### running a diff between two arbitrary commits

  * left click on the "new" commit
  * navigate using the scrollbar (no keyboard shortcut, AFAICT) to some other
    commit
  * *right-click* and choose "Diff this -> selected"

Now you can browse that diff using the keyboard or mouse.  Note that any
movement that selects a different commit (like pressing an arrow key) will
change the view to show that commit, so while examining this "diff", stick to
[these keys](#bcpc).

<a name="sfc">

## searching for commits

Here're some ways to search for commits.  The commits that result will become
highlighted in bold, so you can see them in the context of their surrounding
changes.  You can navigate between matches using the shift-up/down-arrow keys.

There is a widget to the left of the search box that controls what type of
search you do.  By default it is set to "containing:", which searches the
commit message.

  * searching on commit message: just hit `"/"` and type in any text.  This
    will match all commits where the commit message contained the text you
    typed.

  * searching by filename: navigate to some commit that affected the file.
    Right click the filename in the bottom right pane and choose "Highlight
    this only".  If you want to add more files to the search in an "OR" type
    match, right click some other file (doesn't have to be the same commit),
    and choose "Highlight this too".

    Notice that when you do this, the search type widget changes from
    "containing:" to "touching paths:".

  * searching by changed text: set the search type widget to "adding/removing
    string:", then type in a search text.

Now that you've understood that widget, take a look at the others on the right
also; they're fairly self-explanatory.  Note that the last widget (All fields,
Headlines, Comments, Author, Committer) is only valid when the type of search
widget shows "containing:".

## navigating the commit tree

There are several ways to navigate the tree quickly.

  * the diff pane always shows all the parents and children of the current
    commit.  Click on any of the hashes to go there.  Some of the text from
    the commit message of those hashes is also shown, to give you an idea of
    what that is.

  * the diff pane also shows all the branches to which this commit belongs.
    Click any of them to go to the head of that branch.

  * when the commit graph gets really complex, the line connecting two commits
    is broken.  Click on any line segment (not on a dot or a dangling
    arrowhead) and the diff pane changes to show details for that line segment
    -- all parents and children are shown.

  * as above, but if you click on the *arrowhead*, you will be taken to the
    portion of the tree where the other end of the arrowhead would go to.
    Your "current" commit is still the same; this is just a way of
    "connecting" two pieces of the graph that are otherwise too far away.

  * "Follows:" and "Precedes:" show the nearest tag before and after the
    commit for each branch that the commit is a part of.  For example, if you
    find the commit for a bugfix or a feature you want, this will tell you the
    minimum version you should upgrade to.

## some other tricks

  * expand the diff view by using the spin control that says "Lines of
    context"; the default value is 3.

  * find the "origin" of any line visible in the "diff" pane by right clicking
    and choosing "Show origin of this line".  This does not make sense for
    lines prefixed by a plus sign of course.

  * go to a specific commit by SHA: click on a commit, hit TAB twice to get
    the focus onto the SHA1 field, then type in the first few characters of
    the SHA you want.

    If you click in the field with a mouse, it deselects the text within the
    field, and (for some reason), shift-select is disabled so you have to hold
    down the delete key to delete the entire field before you start typing in
    the new hash.  Irritating, but it's only the mouse use, not keyboard use,
    so it's ok, I guess.
