# archived articles {-}

.@red<**DISCLAIMER**>@

This directory has a bunch of stuff that I wrote a long time ago.  When I
cleaned up the whole site (Dec 2013) I did not have time to check each one
out, verify if what they say still holds, and generally fix things up.

Use your discretion in making use of this information.  Stuff that is
conceptual in nature is probably still true, while stuff that includes actual
code or commands may need double checking.  Git *has* changed a lot in the
last few years!

.#d

**General**

*   A bunch of [links](links.html) of all kinds -- basic stuff/concepts,
    tutorials, stuff that refugees from legacy VCSs might need, digging into
    git/troubleshooting, and a whole bunch of advocacy links.

**Branching and workflow**

*   [branches](branches.html) -- local, remote, and topic branches;
    maintenance branches, throwaway branches...
*   An article on [customer branches](special-branches.html), with a section
    on **SVN-itis** (conflating branch and subdirectory!)
*   one possible[workflow](workflow-integ-devs.html) for integrating N
    developers and 1 integrator, using [gitolite](../gitolite/index.html)

.#d

**Random technical notes**

*   [repo corruption](corruption.html) -- notes from something I did once for
    a work colleague and written down so I don't forget
*   notes on [grafting](grafting.html) in git
*   [ignoring an upstream commit permanently](ignore-upstream-commit.html)
*   Fixing [whitespace](whitespace-index-filter.html) errors

**Other VCSs**

*   for people who thing [hg](hg.html) is just as good ;-)
*   For people who think [SVN](svn.html) is good enough.  While the same title
    applied to Hg may sound a little harsh, I have no sympathy for people who
    still advocate SVN.  The only thing that has changed in my stance is that
    in the early days I used to take issue with them, now I just ignore them.
    It's not even worth arguing about now.
*   [cvs to git](cvs2git.html)
*   converting [visual source shredder](vss2git.html) to git

.#t

