% fixing-up common and customer branches

The following document explains how to maintain a 'common' branch,
with one or more 'customer specific' branches that hang off of the
common branch.  The inspiration was a question about maintaining
'work' and 'home' configurations which differ slightly from a
'common' configuration, which leads to the same sort of problem.

In an ideal  world, you'd keep 'common' development in the 'common' branch,
and 'customer specific' development in the corresponding customer branches.
In the real world, often the separation was not done properly in advance,
(maybe it was not known, or maybe for initial testing reasons it had to be
done in one branch, or whatever), and so you now have a mix of 'common' and
'special' changes all together.

**This article describes one way to 'fix up' such a mixed development into the
proper form**.

# The basic rules

The basic rules are best described by Junio in
<http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.git/110489>

  * You make edits to common files only on the common branch.
  * You merge from common to deployment, never the other way.

This document shows how one might do that.  [Junio also helped
with comments on a previous draft of this text.  However, any
errors or other problems that remain are mine.]

# Terminology

We use the following terminology:

'common' is the branch representing the base product.  All
regular customers get this version.

'special' is a branch for a specific customer.  This customer
needs changes unique to his environment, which should not be
merged back into the common branch.  However, this branch must
regularly get the benefit of changes in the mainline 'common'
branch.  (This is the genesis of the two rules above).

If you have more than one special customer the same logic
will apply for each of them separately, although if you have
too many such customers you may also want to look at [Never
merging back](http://gitster.livejournal.com/26540.html)
for an additional tip on this.

# The nitty gritty

## Before you start

The history looks like this in the beginning:

    -----o          <- special branch (current)
        /
    ---o            <- common branch

The 'special' branch has been tested for the feature you are
working on, and this represents a stable point in the development
to try and re-organise the code, separate out 'common' code from
'special' code, etc.

Before you start, make a temporary branch TEMP from
'special'; leave special where it was.

    git checkout -b TEMP special

You now make some changes for the special customer, which
also involve some 'common' changes that need to be ported
back to the common branch.  The topology now looks like
this, where A, B, C, are changes that logically belong on
'common', and 1, 2, 3, are changes that are specific to this
customer.

Notice that the 2 sets of changes are intermixed because
that is how the development happened, and that there is even
one commit where common and special changes are mixed
(perhaps you realised this only later).

    -----o--A--B1--2--3--C          <- "TEMP" branch (current)
        /
    ---o                            <- common

Meanwhile, just to make things interesting, the common
branch has also had some other, unrelated changes which you
eventually want on the special branch as well.

    -----o--A--B1--2--3--C          <- "TEMP" branch (current)
        /                                            
    ---o--X--Y                      <- common

## Separating 'common' and 'special'

The first thing to do is to tease the tangled commits apart
using rebase.

Using `git rebase -i special`, get the topology into this
shape.  Note that we have split the "B1" commit into B and 1
separately.  `git help rebase` has a very simple and clear
section on splitting commits, so I will not detail that
here.

    -----o--A--B--C--1--2--3        <- "TEMP" branch (current)
        /                                              
    ---o--X--Y                      <- common

At this point, the tree that results should be identical to the one you
started this exercise with, so ideally there should be no need to test.  You
can, if you wish, check that the trees are indeed the same

    git diff TEMP@{1} TEMP

The `@{1}` notation specifies the shape of the TEMP branch before the rebase
started.

## Updating and testing the 'common' branch {#utcb}

Now switch to the 'common' branch and cherry pick the
changes that belong on 'common'.  The simplest way to cherry
pick is gitk.

    git checkout common
    gitk
    # and cherry pick first A, then B, then C, in order

At this point, your TEMP branch has still not changed from when you started
this re-organisation.  However, you have now introduced 3 new commits onto
the 'common' branch, so that set of changes needs to be tested to make sure
things are fine.

    -----o--A--B--C--1--2--3        <- "TEMP" branch
        /                                              
    ---o--X--Y--A'--B'--C'          <- common (current)

Be sure you test the new functionality before proceeding.  This test will
likely be different from your tests on the TEMP branch, because only part of
the new code in TEMP goes to 'common'.  If the test failed or required fixups,
do them in the context of the 'common' case only, right here on the 'common'
branch.  **Note that this affects the rebase coming up later!**

## Merging 'common' into 'special'

Once that test is done, merge from 'common' to 'special'

    git checkout special
    git merge common

which results in the following topology:

           A--B--C--1--2--3     <- TEMP
          /
     ----o-----------------o    <- special (current)
        /                 /
    ---o--X--Y--A'--B'--C'

## Fixing up 'special'

Now all we need is to get commits 1, 2, and 3 onto 'special'.  Although this
is easiest done by using 'rebase', that will only work if your [updating and
testing on 'common'](#utcb) did not cause any changes or fixups (that is, the
changes A, B, and C are still identical to the changes A', B', and C'.

In the general case, therefore, cherry-pick is better, as long as you make
sure you don't miss any commits:

    gitk
    # and cherry pick first 1, then 2, then 3, in order

This gives you the following topology (in which we have ignored the TEMP
branch)

                             1'--2'--3'     <- special (current)
                            /
     ----o-----------------o
        /                 /
    ---o--X--Y--A'--B'--C'

## Final sanity check

At this point you should *definitely* re-test all the changes you made, to
make sure nothing got missed out.  If there were no 'X' and 'Y' commits on
the 'commits' branch, you could try

    git diff TEMP special

to check that the tree is still the same as before.  But again, in the
general case, you probably will have commits 'X' and 'Y' included so it is
necessary to re-test.

Once all this is done, you don't need TEMP anymore, and can delete it:

    git branch -d TEMP
