% for people who think SVN is good enough ;-)

The official comparison is [here](http://git.or.cz/gitwiki/GitSvnComparsion).
There is also a [Git - SVN crash course](http://git-scm.com/course/svn.html).

*Lots of SVN info is scattered in a few other files in this directory;
eventually it should all be pulled into this file.*

^^as Churchill said, so much to do, and so little time in which to do it... (*sigh*)^^

What follows is my understanding of the SVN scenario, from various sources.  I
personally have used SVN only briefly.  If there are errors in the SVN part of
this description please let [me](mailto:sitaramc@gmail.com) know.

# briefly...

Git's advantages over SVN (all of them affect productivity and/or
maintainability, indicated in parens as **P** or **M**) are:

  * **(P)** handles merges automatically (in fact SVN doesn't really "handle"
    merges; merge history must be manually recorded and managed, and it's
    almost impossible to have 2 branches merging regularly in SVN without a
    lot of pain for the integration team)

  * **(M)** handles file renames correctly; helps in refactoring (in SVN, a
    rename is handled as a delete of the old file plus an add of the new file,
    and it is only tracked as such if you explicitly told svn about the
    rename.  That is not the only brittle aspect; renames and merges don't mix
    well, apparently.  Also, SVN may [become confused][wpsvn1] when files are
    modified and renamed in the same commit.)

  * **(P, M)** devs can create local branches without polluting the central server
    -- experimental features can be developed and tested "on the side", with
    full revision control and granular commits.  If the experiment worked, you
    bring it into the main repo (without losing the individual commits),
    otherwise you toss it.  In SVN, a successful side project is forced to
    enter the main project as one large chunk of code, which seriously affects
    future maintainability.

  * **(P, M)** devs make lots of small commits instead of one humongous commit --
    much easier for code review, debugging, cherry-picking, and merging with
    other changes.  Merge-conflict resolution happens on much smaller units
    instead of one huge chunk of code dumped on the repo!  In SVN, every
    commit goes to the server, forcing commits to be large and monolithic, in
    turn causing every merge to be a serious exercise rather than a couple of
    minutes work.

  * **(P)** common VCS operations do not need network or server access, and are
    blazingly fast.  SVN and other VCSs may take so long that a developer who
    is, say, trying to trace the changes that caused a bug may feel it's
    easier to go through the code himself than run a 'diff' against the last
    known good version!  That is, these VCSs have the tools but it's a pain to
    use them!

Git does a lot of things better than any other VCS:

  * **(P)** branching/merging is so bad in most other VCSs that lots of projects
    forgo all the advantages of parallel development!  Or they have to have a
    separate "merge team", and they freeze development for a couple of days to
    do the merge.  With git, merges (and therefore, merge conflicts, if any)
    are (i) handled by the developer closest to the merged code, not an
    upstream integrator who probably doesn't know the new code well, and (ii)
    processed in many small chunks instead of one large chunk of code.

  * **(M)** git doesn't track files, it tracks content.  So if a piece of code
    moved from one source file to another, and you look at the history of that
    file visually, git will tell you that these lines came from that file over
    there, and it'll also tell you the history of those lines before they came
    here.  This is way beyond what any other VCS can imagine doing, and is a
    real lifesaver for someone who picks up a complex project for maintenance
    or a new team member is trying to understand the existing project.

# ...and a bit more detail

## 'svn update' on very active projects

When you, as a developer, have made a fair number of changes on your
workstation, and wish to commit these to the SVN repo, you do an 'svn update'.
This brings in the latest changes from the server.

Unfortunately, if the other developers have also been very active, there could
be a lot of new/changed code.  All of those changes, in one fell swoop, are
now merged into your working copy, so conflicts are very likely.

Worse, the 'svn update' has managed to lose the separation between your local
changes and the updates that came from the server.  You now have exactly one
chance to resolve those conflicts and commit the result.  And you'd better do
it fast -- before the upstream tree changes *again*!

[This is when an SVN newbie will realise he should have backed up his current
source tree using tar or zip ;-)]

With git, you would not do the `git pull` while you still have uncommitted
changes in your local repository.  This is a *distributed* VCS, so you have a
local repository to take care of all that.

So just commit all *your* changes locally, and *then* do a `git pull`!

Of course this will have the same conflicts as in SVN and you still have to do
a manual conflict resolution, *but*:

1.  your local changes are *cleanly* saved, so if you botch up the manual
    conflict resolution, you can go back to your last local commit and try
    again.  As many times as you need to, really.
2.  if you do a `git pull --rebase`, (which is closer to what SVN does
    actually), then git will apply your local changes *one commit at a time*
    instead of the whole thing in one shot, making the conflict resolution
    also go in small, easily digestible chunks.
3.  in rare cases, the 'upstream' has changed so much that a lot of your local
    changes become invalid and you have to redo them.  With SVN -- you have to
    throw the whole lot away and start again.  With git, you would have made a
    series of small, granular, commits on your local tree, and this lets you
    salvage the pieces that are still acceptable and redo only those that are
    not.  Then you do your `git pull` or `git pull --rebase` again.

^^Basic idea from a post by Junio at
<http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.version-control.git/110671>^^

## local caching and repository size

### What extra information is cached locally?

When you do an 'svn checkout', you get a working copy of the revision you
checked out, plus svn saves away an extra copy of the same stuff.  This allows
you to do things like see what you changed with respect to the checked out
version.

But if you need a diff between your copy and some other version, you need
network access.  If you need a diff between two checked-in revisions, again
you need network access.

When you do a `git clone`, however, git stores the complete history of all the
branches that the parent repository has!  So the only time you now need
network access is when you want to update the server, nothing else.

This might make you think git's repositories are *huge*!  Far from it; here's
[an example](http://keithp.com/blogs/Repository_Formats_Matter/) that uses the
Mozilla repository, with full history from 1998 or so:

  * CVS repo: 2.7 GB
  * imported to SVN: 8.2 GB
  * imported to GIT: 450 MB!
  * (a full checkout of just the source: 350 MB)

That's a ratio of almost 20:1 in size over SVN.

# some links

  * <http://markmcb.com/2008/10/18/3-reasons-to-switch-to-git-from-subversion/>:
    the first example, 'Endless, Easy, Non-File-System-Based, Local Branches',
    is particularly powerful and convincing
  * <http://developers.slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=1079921&cid=26321869> from
    somewhere in the trenches

----

[wpsvn1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Subversion#Current_limitations_and_problems
