# converting Visual Source Shredder to GIT

[Thanks to http://martinfowler.com/bliki/VersionControlTools.html for the
new expansion of VSS]

This is a 2 step process.  For large values of 2, as they say :)  But the nice
thing is it can all be done in Linux; no need to use a Windows machine as long
as you have a copy of the full VSS repo.

## build vss2svn

The base for all this is <http://www.pumacode.org/projects/vss2svn>.  What I
did is the following:

  * download the latest vss2svn (this includes ssphys also):

        svn checkout http://svn.pumacode.org/repos/vss2svn/trunk/ vss2svn    

  * follow all the instuctions to install all the various perl modules needed,
    copied [here](#perlmodinstalls) just in case.

  * install libboost-devel; ssphys needs it to build.  On my current system
    (Mandriva 2009), the version was 1.36.  I got a compile error which I
    fixed by running [this patch](#libboostpatch) (don't ask me how I found
    this -- I compared the nearest boost libraries with each other and
    determined that this only seemed to be a name change, and that too *only*
    in 1.36 -- very weird, but anyway...)

  * build and install vss2svn (again, instructions from the main site
    reproduced here for convenience):

        cd vss2svn
        perl Build.PL
        ./Build
        sudo ./Build install

And that should be that...

## run vss2svn

This should be easy enough, for most normal repos.  You need to get the entire
VSS repo onto your system (the one that contains something called
'srcsafe.ini').  Put that in some "work" directory, and do this:

    vss2svn.pl --vssdir PATH_TO_VSS_REPO --revtimerange 60

I have no idea how to deal with labels etc., properly in this command, but the
basic stuff should work fine.

## load the SVN dump file

The previous step should produce just an SVN dump file, which you need to
load, and that gives you an SVN repo.

    svnadmin create svnrepo
    svnadmin load svnrepo < SVN_DUMPFILE

You may want to checkout this repo and at least see what "projects" it has,
because I do not know any other way of doing this if you don't already know
(from the VSS side).

    mkdir svnco
    svn checkout file://$PWD/svnrepo svnco

## convert svn to git

This is, naturally, the easiest of all, especially if you don't intend to go
back :)

    mkdir gitrepo
    cd gitrepo
    git svn clone file://PATH_TO_SVN_REPO

Of course, if you have used the VSS repo to store multiple projects, this will
not work right -- VSS/SVN can happpily dump unrelated projects in one
repository (or subdirectories masquerading as projects for that matter),
whereas in git each project is in its own repository.

So do it this way:

    git svn clone file://PATH_TO_SVN_REPO/projectname
        # for each project

## checking the results

### tags

Tags (labels in VSS) don't seem to carry across properly.

^^[rant] My idea of a tag is a symbolic name for a certain revision, so if you
check it out you should see approximately the same number of files that the
repo had around that time frame.  What I actually see is that the number of
files representing the various tags (as seen from an SVN checkout) range from
5% to 75% of the actual number of files in the repo!  So -- until I see a VSS
repo where the tags are actually used (and I mean *used*, as in, "these tags
do get *checked out* when needed; they're not just for show!") I'm not going
to worry about it.^^

### deleted files

I've also not tested if renamed/deleted files etc also work OK, but I think
they ought to.

### that damn CRLF thing

When you do it this way, you don't have an opportunity to fix the CRLFs as
they go in -- they'll all go into the repo as CRLF.  If you try to force it on
the "git svn clone" itself (by prepping a blank git repo with `git config
core.autocrlf input` and then svn-cloning into that), you get checksum errors!

You have to do this after the fact.  Here's the sequence:

    git config --unset core.autocrlf
    git checkout branch
    git config core.autocrlf input
    git filter-branch --tree-filter 'find . -type f -print0|xargs -0 touch' HEAD
    git config --unset core.autocrlf

The first 'unset' is just a precaution.  If you do a checkout with autocrlf
set to input, the work tree will immediately look dirty, so the filter-branch
will refuse to run.  So you checkout under "default" conditions, then set the
autocrlf config, then run the tree filter.

The last 'unset' is required; you really don't want autocrlf to be anything on
a Unix box.

Note: in theory, a dummy filter that does nothing *should* work.  But it seems
to miss a lot of files, which still go in with CRLFs.  Doing an explicit touch
seems to be the only way.  I have no idea why this is so.

### bottom line

Anyway, your bottom line should be:

 1. *confirm that the tip is OK*: make sure that the actual trees generated at
    the tip of the git repository match those in a fresh "get" from the
    corresponding project in VSS
 2. *try to confirm past history is OK*: if possible, make the same check for
    a couple of intermediate revisions also
 3. *save the VSS repo* in a read-only location for future reference, should
    there ever (much later in time) be a question on the accuracy of the
    history at some revision that was not explicitly checked during the
    migration.

## alternative method using perl on windows

There is another method, achieved by hacking a perl script that was supposed
to convert [to SVN](http://www.riseup.com/~brettw/dev/VSS2Subversion.html), to
make it go [to git](../tools/vss2git.pl) instead.  Pros and cons:

  * (+) no CRLF problem
  * (+) easier to use: you just need msysgit and this program, no messing
    around with all these dependencies for vss2svn (but then, you can execute
    vss2svn the same way too -- they have a standalone windows executable)
  * (-) **NOT** very reliable; please double check your data if you really
    care about history.  Deep down beyond a point where some files were
    deleted, I found mismatches with a VSS "get" directory.
  * (-) leaves vssver.scc and other junk lying around
  * (-) definitely can't handle deletes
  * (-) timestamps only to the nearest minute

One reason why I'm keeping this around is if a VSS repo is corrupt enough (and
it seems that happens quite often) then maybe only the original VSS can read
it.  To recover usable data from such an instance may be a futile attempt but
no harm keeping two tools around...!

----

## Appendices

<font size=-1>

### #perlmodinstalls installing the perl modules

Note: I *did* indeed have to install DBD::SQLite2 manually.  Also, Text::Glob
had to be installed using `perl -MCPAN -e shell` followed by `install
Text::Glob`; for some reason the "-e install ..." thing didn't work

    for m in Module::Build XML::Simple Time::CTime DBD::SQLite2 DBI Tie::IxHash Text::Glob Data::UUID; do
       perl -MCPAN -e "install $m"
    done

    # SQLite2 failed to install, even with "force install ...", so:
    cd ~/.cpan/build/DBD-SQLite2-0.33
    # May need to create the makefile...
    # perl Makefile.PL
    make install

    # the Config:Ini module is not in CPAN, so:
    wget http://backpan.perl.org/authors/id/A/AV/AVATAR/Config-Ini-1.08.tar.gz
    tar xzf Config-Ini-1.08.tar.gz 
    cd Config-Ini-1.08
    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make install

### #libboostpatch patch for libboost 1.36

    commit 4a3a283593bf8a991e0553e3ac3252c75a1349db
    Author: Sitaram Chamarty <sitaramc@gmail.com>
    Date:   Thu Apr 16 09:27:00 2009 +0530

        (touch wood) fixed up a weird incompatibility with my *specific* version of boost

    diff --git a/vss2svn/ssphys/SSPhysLib/SSItemInfoObject.cpp b/vss2svn/ssphys/SSPhysLib/SSItemInfoObject.cpp
    index 7d88a8e..0cd12ea 100644
    --- a/vss2svn/ssphys/SSPhysLib/SSItemInfoObject.cpp
    +++ b/vss2svn/ssphys/SSPhysLib/SSItemInfoObject.cpp
    @@ -162,7 +162,7 @@ std::string SSItemInfoObject::GetDataFileName () const
       std::string fileName = GetFile ()->GetFileName () + GetLatestExt ();
       boost::filesystem::path fpath(fileName, boost::filesystem::native);

    -  if (!boost::filesystem::exists(fpath) && fpath.has_leaf() && fpath.has_branch_path())
    +  if (!boost::filesystem::exists(fpath) && fpath.has_filename() && fpath.has_parent_path())
       {
         std::string lcLeaf = fpath.leaf();
         std::string ucLeaf = fpath.leaf();

</font>
